
Synthetic and Natural Coumarins as Cytotoxic Agents
Irena Kostova*
Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Medical University, 2 Dunav St., Sofia 1000, Bulgaria
Abstract: Coumarins, an old class of compounds, are naturally occurring benzopyrene derivatives. A lot of coumarins
have been identified from natural sources, especially green plants. The pharmacological and biochemical properties and
therapeutic applications of simple coumarins depend upon the pattern of substitution. Coumarins have attracted intense
interest in recent years because of their diverse pharmacological properties. Among these properties, their cytotoxic
effects were most extensively examined. In this review, their broad range of effects on the tumors as shown by various in
vitro and in vivo experiments and clinical studies are discussed. Hence, these cytotoxic coumarins represent an exploitable
source of new anticancer agents, which might also help addressing side-toxicity and resistance phenomena. These natural
compounds have served as valuable leads for further design and synthesis of more active analogues. In this review, plant
derived coumarins and their synthetic analogues were systematically evaluated based on their plant origin, structureactivity relationship and anticancer efficacy. Owing the their diverse effects and inconclusive results from different in
vitro studies, the mechanism of their action is not yet fully understood and correlation of effects with chemical structures
is not conclusive at the moment. It is the objective of this review to summarize experimental data for different coumarins,
used as cytotoxic agents, because promising data have been reported for a series of these agents. Yet, the results from
different coumarins with various tumor lines are contradictory in part. We therefore conclude that there is still a long way
to go until we know which cytotoxic agent will clinically be suitable for what tumor entity for treatment. Their ability to
bind metal ions represents an additional means of modulating their pharmacological responses.
Key Words: Synthetic and natural coumarins, cytotoxicity.
INTRODUCTION
Numerous compounds with biological activity have been
investigated, however many of them are not suitable for
therapeutic use due to their toxic, carcinogenic and mutagenic properties. Nowadays, it is possible to make
modifications of active chemical structures, in order to
synthesize compounds with improved therapeutic activity
and reduced toxicity.
A variety of herbs and herbal extracts contain different
phytochemicals with biological activity that can provide
therapeutic effects. Several herbs can help to provide some
protection against cancer and stimulate the immune system.
Coumarins comprise a group of natural compounds found
in a variety of plant sources. The very long association of
plant coumarins with various animal species and other
organisms throughout evolution may account for the
extraordinary range of biochemical and pharmacological
activities of these chemicals in mammalian and other
biological systems. The coumarins that were studied have
divers biological properties and various effects on the
different cellular systems. A lot of biological parameters
should be evaluated to increase our understanding of
mechanisms by which these coumarins act. Coumarins have
important effects in plant biochemistry and physiology,
acting as antioxidants, enzyme inhibitors and precursors of
toxic substances. In addition, these compounds are involved
*Address correspondence to this author at the Department of Chemistry,
Faculty of Pharmacy, Medical University, 2 Dunav St., Sofia 1000,
Bulgaria; Tel: 92 36 569; Fax: 987 987 4; E-mail: irenakostova@yahoo.com
in the actions of plant growth hormones and growth
regulators, the control of respiration, photosynthesis, as well
as defense against infection. The coumarins have long been
recognized to possess anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, antiallergic, hepatoprotective, antithrombotic, antiviral, and
anticarcinogenic activities. The hydroxycoumarins are
typical phenolic compounds and, therefore, act as potent
metal chelators and free radical scavengers. They are
powerful chain-breaking antioxidants. The coumarins
display a remarkable array of biochemical and pharmacological actions, some of which suggest that certain members
of this group of compounds may significantly affect the
function of various mammalian cellular systems.
The coumarins are extremely variable in structure, due to
the various types of substitutions in their basic structure,
which can influence their biological activity. A careful
structure-system-activity-relationship study of coumarins
with special respect to carcinogenicity, mutagenicity, and
cancer-preventing activities should be conducted. Vast
majority of coumarins, completely innocuous, may be
beneficial in a variety of human disorders, in spite of some
ongoing controversy.
The naturally occurring coumarins will be the primary
focus of this review, with occasional reference to synthetic
compounds. The review is not exhaustive; it is intended to
acquaint the reader with this interesting group of natural
plant compounds. There has been, in recent years, a major
rekindling of interest in pharmacognosy. Coumarins turn out
to be present in many natural therapeutically utilized
products. They hold a place apart in view of their cytotoxic
activity. It was suggested that alterations in the chemical
30 Curr. Med. Chem. – Anti-Cancer Agents, 2005, Vol. 5, No. 1 Irena Kostova
structure of coumarins could change their cytotoxic
properties.
Actually, in vitro cytotoxicity assays with cultured cells
are widely used to chemicals including cancer chemotherapeutics, pharmaceuticals, biomaterials, natural toxins,
antimicrobial agents and industrial chemicals because they
are rapid and economical. These cytotoxicity tests measure
the concentration of the substance that damages components,
structures or cellular biochemical pathways, and they also
allow direct extrapolation of quantitative data to similar in
vitro situations.
SYNTHETIC AND SEMI-SYNTHETIC SIMPLE
COUMARINS
Coumarin (1, 2-benzopyrone) (1), the parent molecule of
coumarin derivatives, is the simplest compound of a large
class of naturally occurring phenolic substances made of
fused benzene and a-pyrone rings [1]. The investigation of
coumarin compounds revealed that a wide spectrum of
medicinal plant extracts that were in use as early as 1000
A.D. contains a high content of coumarins. Subsequent
analysis of scientific literature revealed numerous reports on
the antiproliferative and antitumor activities of a variety of
coumarin compounds, e.g., both coumarin itself and 7-
hydroxycoumarin (2) have been reported to inhibit the
proliferation of a number of human malignant cell lines in
vitro [2-5] and have demonstrated activity against several
types of animal tumors [6-10]. These compounds have also
been reported in clinical trials to demonstrate activity against
prostate cancer, malignant melanoma, and metastatic renal
cell carcinoma [11-13].
For coumarins, generally the in vitro structure-activity
relationship studies have shown that cytotoxicity is found
with derivatives containing ortho-dihydroxy substituents
(Kolodziej et al., 1997, [14]). Also, the chemical-structure/
biological activity study of the coumarins showed that the
addition of a cathecolic group to the basic structure induces
increased cytotoxic activity in tumor cell lines (Kolodziej et
al., 1997, [14]). The different cytotoxic values found for the
coumarins could be related to presence and the positions of
the hydroxyls in their structures.
The cytotoxicity of 22 natural and semi-synthetic simple
coumarins was evaluated in GLC4, a human small cell lung
carcinoma cell line, and in COLO 320, a human colorectal
cancer cell line, using the microculture tetrazolium (MTT)
assay [14]. With IC50 values > 100 mM, following a
continuous (96 h) incubation, most coumarins exhibited only
low cytotoxicity. Several compounds, however, displayed
significant potencies. As far as the structure-cytotoxicity
relationship is concerned, it is conspicuous that all the
potentially active natural compounds possess at least two
phenolic groups in either the 6, 7- or 6, 8-positions. In
addition, the 5-formyl-6-hydroxy substituted semi-synthetic
analogue was found to be potent, reflecting the importance
of at least two polar functions for high cytotoxicity.
Several hydroxylated and/or methoxylated coumarin
derivatives were tested for their relative cytotoxicity on four
human tumor cell lines (oral squamous cell carcinoma HSC2, HSC-3, melanoma A-375 and promyelocytic HL-60) and
three normal human cells (gingival fibroblast HGF,
periodontal ligament fibroblast HPLF and pulp cell HPC)
[15]. Tumor cell-specific cytotoxicity was detected in all 6,
7-dihydroxy-substituted coumarins only. The observations
indicate that the tumor-specific cytotoxicity of the naturally
occurring coumarin esculetin (6, 7-dihydroxycoumarin) (3)
can be further enhanced by proper substitutions at 3- and/or
4-position(s) of the molecule. Agarose gel electrophoresis
revealed that esculetin and its derivatives with tumor-specific
cytotoxicity induce internucleosomal DNA fragmentation in
HL-60 cells.
Ratanasavanh D. et al. [16] compared the cytotoxic effect
of coumarin and its derivatives, 7-hydroxycoumarin, 4-
hydroxycoumarin (4), o-hydroxyphenyl acetic acid and ocoumaric acid (5), on cultured hepatocytes from human, rat,
mouse and rabbit liver. At 10-5 and 5.10-5 M, coumarin and
its derivatives did not give rise to any signs of toxicity on
cultured hepatocytes of the four species. At 10-4 M,
coumarin, but not its derivatives, induced release of lactate
dehydrogenase (LDH) into the medium, especially in rat
hepatocyte cultures. Intracellular LDH activities were
correspondingly reduced. The cytotoxic effect of coumarin
in cultured rat hepatocytes was evidenced on morphological
examination and from the results of the 3-(4, 5-
dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2, 5-diphenyltetrazolium (MTT)
reduction test. At higher concentrations (5 .10-4 M), 7-
hydroxycoumarin and o-coumaric acid were also found to be
cytotoxic in cultured rat hepatocytes. The cytotoxic effect of
coumarin (5.10-4 M) was decreased in the presence of SKF
525-A, a cytochrome P450 inhibitor. Interspecies comparisons showed that rat hepatocytes were the most sensitive to
the toxicity of coumarin and its derivatives, whereas human
hepatocytes were the most resistant. The results suggest that
the cytotoxicity of coumarin is metabolism and speciesdependent. Thus, the rat may not be a suitable model for
evaluating the pharmacological hazards of coumarin in
humans.
Coumarin, 4- hydroxycoumarin and 7- hydroxycoumarin,
as well as o-, m-coumaric acid (6) and p-coumaric acid (7)
were tested against P-815 and P-388 tumor cells in vitro
[17]. In addition, the compounds were investigated in
various in vitro immunological test systems and genuine
coumarin was tested furthermore against the Sarcoma-180 in
CD1 mice. In vivo, coumarin showed only a moderate
antitumor effect against the allogeneic Sarcoma-180 at
concentrations of 10 and 40 mg/kg, with inhibition rates of
49 and 60%, respectively. However, both concentrations
were markedly toxic. In vitro all compounds were more or
less cytotoxic against P-815 and P-388 tumor cell lines
starting at a concentration of 100 mg/mL. At subtoxic
concentrations (less than or equal to 10 mg/mL) the samples
showed no mitogenic activity against murine spleen
lymphocytes and PHA costimulated human peripheral blood
lymphocytes. Furthermore, with the coumarin derivatives
neither cytotoxic macrophages could be induced against P815 tumor cells nor an increased release of Il-2 and TNFalpha could be observed. Only 7- hydroxycoumarin, in
concentrations of 2 and 20 mg/mL, caused a strong increase
in phagocytosis of 124 and 84% in both, human peripheral
blood granulocytes and murine peritoneal macrophages,
respectively.
Synthetic and Natural Coumarins as Cytotoxic Agents Curr. Med. Chem. – Anti-Cancer Agents, 2005, Vol. 5, No. 1 31
A selection of natural and synthetic coumarin compounds, including the hydroxylated and nitrated derivatives,
were assessed for their cytotoxic potential using the
microculture 3-(4, 5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2, 5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay for cellular viability [18].
For the first time this study utilized both human skin
malignant melanocytes (SK-MEL-31) and normal human
skin fibroblastic cells (HS613.SK), allowing identification of
those coumarin derivatives that are selectively toxic.
Coumarin was found to exhibit comparatively low toxicity in
both cell types, while 7-hydroxycoumarin and coumarin had
similar activity in SK-MEL-31 cells. The entire series of
hydroxylated coumarins were considerably more toxic in
HS613.SK than in SK-MEL-31 cells. Novel synthetic
nitrated coumarins, 6-nitro-7-hydroxycoumarin (8) and 3, 6,
8-nitro-7-hydroxycoumarin (9), were shown to be significantly more toxic to SK-MEL-31 than HS613.SK cells. In
the malignant melanocyte skin cell line (SK-MEL-31) the
cytotoxic effects of these nitro-derivatives were shown to be
dose and time dependent. Therefore, the cytotoxic potential
of coumarins appears to be highly dependent on the nature
and position of the functional group. In addition, nitration of
7-hydroxycoumarin produced compounds that were
cytotoxic to malignant melanocytes, suggesting that these
nitro-derivatives may have a chemotherapeutic role in the
future.
Finn G.J. et al. [19] determined the selective cytotoxicity
of eight coumarin compounds to human renal carcinoma
cells, relative to non-carcinoma proximal tubular cells.
Selectivity cytotoxicity was observed following exposure to
6-nitro-7-hydroxycoumarin and 7, 8-dihydroxycoumarin
(10). 6-Nitro-7-hydroxycoumarin induced cytotoxicity was
irreversible in both cell lines, unlike 7, 8-dihydroxycoumarin, which was reversible in the carcinoma cells only.
Mobility shift and BrdU incorporation assays showed that
both compounds did not intercalate DNA but had a
concentration-dependent inhibitory effect on its synthesis.
All coumarins studied were found to be non-mutagenic using
the standard Ames test. These results would suggest that 6-
nitro-7-hydroxycoumarin and 7, 8-dihydroxycoumarin might
have a therapeutic role to play in the treatment of renal cell
carcinoma.
A derivative of coumarin, 8-nitro-7-hydroxycoumarin
(11), was synthesised, purified and characterised [20]. The
cytostatic and cytotoxic nature of this compound was
determined using both human and animal cell lines grown in
vitro for 96 h in the presence of drug (0-500 mM, equivalent
to 0-104 mg/mL). 8-Nitro-7-hydroxycoumarin was shown to
be cytotoxic to three cell lines, but cytostatic to all cell lines
tested. With K562 and HL-60 cells, cell death was found to
occur by apoptosis. This cytotoxic effect was found to be
irreversible, with cell death continuing to occur following a
96 h recovery period. The cytostatic effects were found to be
irreversible in four of the five cell lines tested. 8-Nitro-7-
hydroxycoumarin demonstrated its cytostatic effects within
24 or 48 h, while its cytotoxic effects appeared more
gradually. The IC50 of 8-nitro-7-hydroxycoumarin was 475-
880 mM, depending on the cell line tested. It was shown to
exert its cytostatic effect through an alteration of cell cycle.
It also inhibited DNA synthesis. The toxicity of 8-nitro-7-
hydroxycoumarin does not appear to be mediated through
the multi-drug resistance (MDR) protein since it caused
significant cytostatic and cytotoxic effects to CHrC5 cells,
which have an increased expression of this protein. This
compound was shown to be non-mutagenic in a standard
Ames test, both with or without a mammalian enzyme
activation system. The applications and mode of actions of
coumarins are discussed.
Ten 6, 12-dihydro-1-benzopyrano[3, 4-b][1, 4]benzothiazin-6-ones and other related coumarins were compared for
their cytotoxic activity and radical intensity [21]. These
compounds showed highest cytotoxic activity against human
promyelocytic leukemic HL-60 cells. They produced radicals
under alkaline conditions, and showed low pi-spin density at
S-atom of the molecule, suggesting the delocalization of pispin density. These data suggest the possible relation
between radical intensity and biological activity. The
cytotoxic effects and alkylating activity of a series of 3-[1-
(alkylamino)-ethylidene]-chroman-2, 4-dione, 2-methoxy-3-
[1-(alkylamino)-ethylidene]-2,3-dihydro-2,4-dioxo-2lambda-
(5)-benzo[e][1,2] oxaphosphinane and [2-oxo-4-phenyl
(alkyl)-2H-chromen-3-yl]-phosphonic acids dimethyl ester
on the two leukemia cell lines HL-60 and NALM-6 have
been determined [22]. The test compounds are much more
toxic to NALM-6 cells than to HL-60 cells. IC50 data are up
to nine times lower for the NALM-6 than for the HL-60 cell
lines. As determined in an in vitro Preussmann test
phosphonic derivatives [2-oxo-4-phenyl(alkyl)-2H-chromen3-yl]-phosphonic acids dimethyl ester possess very high
alkylating activity, phosphoric derivatives are less active
while the derivatives of 3-[1-(alkylamino)-ethylidene]-
chroman-2, 4-dione can be included in the group of low
activity alkylating agents. Using regression analysis QSAR
the authors found a relationship between biological activity
and the physicochemical properties of the test compounds.
Their cytotoxic effect increases with an increase of the
hydrophobic parameters in the region of the substituents at
the 2-, 3- and 4-positions of the benzopyrone skeleton of the
compounds. Several aromatic seleno lactones have been
synthesized and shown to possess significant inhibitory
activity against human colon tumor-8r cells in culture at
concentrations lower than 1mM [23]. Although all of the
compounds tested were found to be active, 5-hydroxy-3-
[(phenylseleno)methyl]hydrocoumarinoctanoate and 5-
hydroxy-3-[(phenylseleno)methyl]hydrocoumarin-decanoate
were found to be the most effective in inhibiting cell growth.
In situ formation of the corresponding alpha-methylene
lactones is postulated to account for the cytotoxic activity in
this class of compounds.
COUMARIN ANTICOAGULANTS AND CYTOTOXICITY
The possibility of a relation between the clotting
mechanism and the development of metastases was
postulated as early as 1878, when Billroth described cancer
cells within a thrombus and interpreted his finding as
evidence of the spread of tumor cells by thromboembolism.
Only a few published studies of the therapeutic efficacy of
anticoagulants against cancer were appropriately designed
randomized trials; otherwise, they have been mainly case
descriptions, retrospective epidemiologic reviews, and small
phase 1 or 2 trials [24]. Moreover, in most trials, the
32 Curr. Med. Chem. – Anti-Cancer Agents, 2005, Vol. 5, No. 1 Irena Kostova
treatment included a combination of cytotoxic drugs plus an
anticoagulant. For this reason, we do not know whether the
possible benefit of anticoagulation was due to an effect on
the clotting system, a direct cytotoxic activity of the anticoagulant [25], or a change in the pharmacokinetics of the
cytotoxic drugs caused by the anticoagulant [26]. Warfarin
(12) (a coumarin anticoagulant) therapy was reported to
improve the survival of patients with small-cell lung cancer,
but this finding has never been confirmed [25]. The results,
obtained, suggest that there may be some survival benefit to
anticoagulation in the treatment of small-cell lung cancer.
The effect is probably not large, judging by the difficulty in
reaching statistical significance, but there does appear to be a
consistent small benefit. The administration of low levels of
anticoagulant is, in general, much less toxic and expensive
than the addition of another chemotherapy agent, or the use
of high-dose chemotherapy with stem cell support. While
intriguing, however, the data are not sufficiently convincing
to alter current clinical practice. There is renewed interest in
determining whether anticoagulation may improve survival
in oncology patients. Although there are many hypotheses for
in vitro antitumor activity of anticoagulants, the practical
question is whether anticoagulants affect cancer mortality in
a clinical setting.
Coumarin anticoagulants inhibit metastasis in several
animal models, but the mechanism of this effect is uncertain.
In order to determine the role of cytotoxic and/or cytostatic
actions of coumarins on the tumour cells, McCulloch P. et
al. [27] have studied the effects of warfarin on tumour cell
growth in a model in which tumour metastasis is inhibited by
this drug. Clonogenic assay, growth curve analysis and
thymidine labelling index revealed that warfarin had no
effects on Mtln3 mammary carcinoma cell growth in vitro at
concentrations below 1 mM. The growth rate of subcutaneously implanted Mtln3 tumour deposits in female
F344 rats, assessed by weight and by stathmokinetic analysis
of the tumour tissue, was identical in warfarin-treated and
control animals. Spontaneous metastasis from such tumours
to the lungs was, however, significantly reduced in warfarintreated animals (median 0 pulmonary tumours per animal in
warfarin treated, eight tumours per animal in control
animals; P less than 0.05, Mann-Whitney). The mean plasma
warfarin concentration in warfarin treated rats was 1.63 _M.
These results suggest that warfarin treatment of the host
animal can inhibit tumour metastasis without having any
direct or indirect effect on the growth rate of the tumour
cells.
The coumarin anticoagulants, dicoumarol (Dicumarol)
(13) and its synthetic derivative warfarin sodium
(Coumadin) (14), have been shown to decrease metastases in
experimental animals [28]. Warfarin sodium, largely
replacing dicoumarol therapeutically as an anticoagulant, has
been used for the treatment of a variety of cancers and shown
to improve tumor response rates and survival in patients with
several types of cancer [29]. However, despite numerous
studies, little information has been acquired on the cellular
mechanism of action of coumarin compounds in the treatment of malignancies. Possibly for this reason, the coumarin
compounds have not received much attention for the
treatment of cancer. Earlier studies revealed that coumarin, 7-
hydroxycoumarin, and 4-hydroxycoumarin inhibit mitosis in
Allium cepa root tips [30]. Interestingly, 7-hydroxycoumarin
disorganized the mitotic spindle microtubules in A. cepa
cells, leading to the random distribution of the chromosomes
at metaphase. This is a form of cytotoxicity common to
mitotic spindle poisons that inhibit mitosis by modifying
microtubule dynamics. On further investigation of the
coumarin literature, it was developed the hypothesis that
coumarin compounds might inhibit cell proliferation by
interfering with mitotic spindle microtubule function [31].
Dicoumarol, a natural anticoagulant drug chemically
designated as 3, 3'-methylenebis[4-hydroxycoumarin], is
metabolized from coumarin in the sweet clover (Melilotus
alba and Melilotus officinalis) by molds, such as Penicillium
nigricans and Penicillium jensi. In studies on the antiproliferative actions of coumarin compounds, Hamta Madari
et al. [31] discovered that dicoumarol inhibits the first
cleavage of Strongylocentrotus purpuratus (sea urchin)
embryos in a concentration-dependent manner with 50%
inhibition occurring at a concentration of 10 µM. The results
suggest that the antiproliferative mechanism of action of
dicoumarol and possibly related pharmacophores may be
mediated by tubulin binding and the stabilization of spindle
microtubule dynamics. Because of its low toxicity and
simple chemical structure, there is potential interest to
explore combinations of antimitotic coumarins with other
chemotherapeutic agents to improve efficacy and lower
toxicity. The results suggest that dicoumarol and Taxol have
the potential to be used together to improve efficacy and
lower toxicity. It is also possible that the coumarin anticoagulants in combination with Taxol may improve cancer
survival rates by other mechanisms. Tumor cell invasion is
dependent on angiogenesis and requires both cell migration
and digestion of basement membrane by proteases. Anticoagulants were thought to reduce the incidence of cancer
metastases by inhibiting formation of a fibrin matrix required
for the fixation of circulating cancer cells. Because Taxol has
been reported to inhibit migration of human ovarian and
prostate carcinoma cells and the coumarin anticoagulants
inhibit the thrombin-induced release of matrix metalloproteinases that cause the breakdown of extracellular matrix
proteins, it is logical to assume that dicoumarol might
enhance the antiadhesive activity of taxanes. Coumarin
anticoagulants inhibit the pathway involving tissue factor and
factor VIIa. Tissue factor VIIa appears to be a major factor in
the regulation of angiogenic growth properties of tumor cells,
and in vivo studies have demonstrated a significant role for
warfarin in the regulation of the inhibition of angiogenesis
[32]. Taxol also has been shown to display antiangiogenic
properties in association with the down-regulation of
vascular endothelial growth factor, a pro-angiogenic factor
that can act directly on endothelial cells to promote vessel
formation. Because these two compounds possess the ability
to inhibit angiogenesis by different mechanisms, it is
possible that when combined, they can produce a synergistic
effect on the inhibition of tumor growth by a mechanism
other than stabilization of microtubule dynamic instability. It
is however important to stress that although coumarin
comprises the substructure of dicoumarol and warfarin, it
does not contain any anticoagulant properties. It would be of
great interest to further investigate the potential antiangiogenic effect of coumarin anticoagulants and Taxol
combinations in vitro and in vivo. Dicoumarol and coumarins
Synthetic and Natural Coumarins as Cytotoxic Agents Curr. Med. Chem. – Anti-Cancer Agents, 2005, Vol. 5, No. 1 33
could provide a new structural class for synthetic elaboration
that could lead to improved antineoplastic drugs. The simple
chemical structure of the coumarins allows great potential to
clinically explore combinations of coumarin analogs with
other microtubule-stabilizing agents in an attempt to improve
efficacy. In addition, dicoumarol and possibly other
coumarin compounds that act by stabilizing microtubule
dynamics might have entirely new tumor specificity than the
currently used antimitotic agents. Their synergistic activity in
combination therapy could be the basis for development of
rational approaches to new forms of cancer chemotherapy.
Table 1. Structures of Coumarins used as Cytotoxic Agents
O O
3
5 4
6
7
8
Compound R3 R4 R5 R6 R7 R8
1 Coumarin H H H H H H
2 7-hydroxycoumarin (Umbelliferone) H H H H OH H
3 6,7-dihydroxycoumarin (Esculetin) H H H OH OH H
4 4-hydroxycoumarin H OH H H H H
8 6-nitro-7-hydroxycoumarin H H H NO2 OH H
9 3,6,8-nitro-7-hydroxycoumarin NO2 H H NO2 OH NO2
10 7,8-dihydroxycoumarin (Daphnetin) H H H H OH OH
11 8-nitro-7-hydroxycoumarin H H H H OH NO2
15 Coumarin-3-carboxylic acid COOH H H H H H
16 6,7-dihydroxy-4,4-dimethylhydrocoumarin 2H 2Me H OH OH H
17 4-methyl-6,7-dihydroxycoumarin H Me H OH OH H
18 Fraxetin H H H OMe OH OH
20 Esculin H H H OGl OH H
21 Auraptene H H H H OGer H
22 3-methylcoumarin Me H H H H H
23 4-methylcoumarin H Me H H H H
24 3,4-dimethylcoumarin Me Me H H H H
25 4-methyl-7-hydroxycoumarin (Mendiaxon) H Me H H OH H
28 Scopoletin H H H OMe OH H
32 Pervilleanine Ph H H H H H
33 5,7-dihydroxy-6-methyl-4-phenyl-8-(3-
phenylpropionyl)coumarin H Ph OH Me OH 3-phenylpropionyl
34 5,7-dihydroxy-6-methyl-4-phenyl-8-(3-phenyltrans-acryloyl)coumarin H Ph OH Me OH 3-phenyl-transacryloyl
35 5,7-dihydroxy-6-methyl-4-phenyl-8-(2-hydroxy-3-
phenylpropionyl)coumarin H Ph OH Me OH 2-hydroxy-3-
phenylpropionyl
36 5-(4-hydroxyphenethenyl)-4,7-dimethoxycoumarin H OMe 4-hydroxy-phenethenyl H OMe H
37 3,8-dimethyl-5-isopropyl-6-methoxycoumarin
(mansonrin A) Me H Isopropyl OMe H Me
38 3,8-dimethyl-5-isopropyl-6-hydroxycoumarin
(mansorin B) Me H Isopropyl OH H Me
34 Curr. Med. Chem. – Anti-Cancer Agents, 2005, Vol. 5, No. 1 Irena Kostova
A selective stimulatory effect of dicoumarol on 2, 7-
diaminomitosene-DNA adduct formation in EMT6 cells
treated with mitomycin C was investigated [33]. Dicumarol
had no effect on alkylation by mitomycin C in cell-free
systems, nor did it have significant effects on adduct formation or cell survival for cells treated with 2, 7- diaminomitosene. It is proposed that in the cell dicumarol stimulates
a reductase enzyme located at subcellular sites where the
activated mitomycin C species has no direct access to DNA
and therefore is diverted into the non-cytotoxic pathway,
which leads to the formation of 2, 7- diaminomitosene and
its adducts.
COUMARIN ANTIOXIDANTS AND CYTOTOXICITY
Plant phenolics are widely consumed and have received
considerable attention as anticarcinogens. Tumor-modulating
effects of coumarin antioxidants also have been studied
using carcinogens. Protective mechanisms include inhibition
of prooxidant carcinogenesis by peroxisome proliferators,
antipromotion effects, and induction of detoxifying enzymes.
The effects of antioxidants in animal studies are complex,
however, and also include tumor promotion, carcinogenic,
and co-carcinogenic activities. The most attractive candidate
anticarcinogens, however, are those that suppress the rate at
which initiated cells progress through the promotionprogression-metastasis pathway without appreciable toxicity,
since their application does not require knowledge of the
initiating carcinogen and, by definition, will not have tumor
promotional properties.
The ability to control the amount and the rate of production of hydroxyl radicals may prove useful for examining the
cytotoxic effects of hydroxyl radicals generated in biological
systems. The kinetics of the production of hydroxyl radicals
during the autoxidation of ferrous ion complexes at pH 7.4
was investigated using the fluorescent probe coumarin-3-
carboxylic acid (15) [34]. The data presented indicate the
usefulness of autoxidation of ferrous ion complexes for
generation of hydroxyl radicals in chemical systems.
Nishiyama T. et al. [35] compared the antioxidative
activities of seven hydrocoumarins with those of alphatocopherol for the oxidation of tetralin and linoleic acid in a
homogeneous solution. Hydrocoumarins exhibited a higher
induction period than that of alpha-Toc in both systems.
However, the rate of oxygen absorption during the induction
period for alpha-Toc was slower than that of the hydrocoumarins in both systems. In addition, 6, 7-dihydroxy-4, 4-
dimethylhydrocoumarin (16) showed less cytotoxicity
toward human fibroblasts than did 2, 6-di-t-butyl-4-methylphenol.
Protective effects of coumarins against cytotoxicity
induced by linoleic acid hydroperoxide were examined in
cultured human umbilical vein endothelial cells [36]. When
the cells were incubated in medium supplemented with
linoleic acid hydroperoxide and coumarins, esculetin (6, 7-
dihydroxycoumarin) and 4-methylesculetin (17) protected
cells from injury by linoleic acid hydroperoxide. Fraxetin
(18) and caffeic acid (19) showed a weak protection. Esculin
(20) as well as esculetin and 4-methylesculetin were effective for protecting cells against linoleic acid hydroperoxideinduced cytotoxicity in the case of pretreatment for 24 h,
however fraxetin and caffeic acid showed no protection.
Since esculetin was detected after 24 h treatment with
esculin, a sugar moiety in the esculin molecule appears to be
hydrolyzed during pretreatment. Coumarins such as
umbelliferone (7-hydroxycoumarin) containing only one
hydroxyl group showed no protective effect in pretreatment
or concurrent treatment. Esculetin and 4-methylesculetin
provided synergistic protection against cytotoxicity induced
by linoleic acid hydroperoxide with alpha-tocopherol.
Furthermore, the radical-scavenging ability of coumarins
was examined in electron spin resonance spectrometry.
Esucletin, 4-methylesculetin, fraxetin, and caffeic acid
showed the quenching effect on the 1, 1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl radical. These results indicate that the presence of
an ortho catechol moiety in the coumarin molecules plays an
important role in the protective activities against linoleic acid
hydroperoixde-induced cytotoxicity.
It is well known that dietary factors play an important
role in enhancement of health status and physical strength in
humans. Recently, it has been shown that certain foods have
a host defense function related to the immune system and
anti-oxidation and anti-tumor activity. The immune system
plays an important role in physical and chemical carcinogenesis and in tumor-bearing hosts. The role of host immune
function has become increasingly important in our
understanding of the mechanisms that are involved in the
body's ability to prevent cancer. Although the interrelationship between diet, immune function and carcinogenesis is not clear, there is increasing evidence that dietary
alteration of the host's immune functions is a key component
of chemoprevention. Macrophages, lymphocytes (T and B
cells), dendritic and Langerhans' cells and natural killer (NK)
cells are important cells for the immune system. Macrophages play a major role in inflammation, repair, humoral
and cellular immunity and metabolic and neoplastic disease
processes. Cytokines, being mesenger molecules of the
immune system, modulate natural immunity. It is known that
several cancer chemopreventive agents can modulate
immune function.
An antioxidant auraptene (7-geranyloxycoumarin) (21)
isolated from the peel of citrus fruit (Citrus natsudaidai
Hayata) has been reported to have chemopreventive effects
on chemically induced carcinogenesis. Dietary administration of auraptene significantly increased the activities of
detoxification (phase II) enzymes, such as quinone reductase
and glutathione S-transferase, in the liver and colon of rats.
In addition, expression of cell proliferation biomarkers, such
as ornithine decarboxylase activity and polyamine biosynthesis, in the colonic mucosal epithelium was significantly
inhibited by dietary feeding of auraptene. These biological
functions of auraptene may contribute to its anti-tumorigenic
effect. However, a modulatory effect of auraptene on
immune function has not been investigated. The results in the
study [37] clearly indicate that oral administration of
auraptene effectively enhances both macrophage and
lymphocyte functions in mice. The study suggested involvement of the immune response in chemically induced
carcinogenesis. Auraptene is a naturally occurring coumarinrelated compound. Coumarin derivatives have been reported
to have enhancing effects on lymphocyte mitogen responsiveness. Therefore, the results in the study suggest that the
Synthetic and Natural Coumarins as Cytotoxic Agents Curr. Med. Chem. – Anti-Cancer Agents, 2005, Vol. 5, No. 1 35
mitogenic activity of auraptene might be due to the coumarin
structure, and 200 mg/kg/day might be an appropriate oral
dose of auraptene to enhance lymphocyte responsiveness.
The results described in [37] may support the hypothesisthat
auraptene directly activates macrophage activities, whereasit
only primes lymphocytes to display a greater immune
response following interaction of splenic lymphocytes with
another stimulus. The findings suggest that auraptene may
exert a part of its cancer chemopreventive activity through
enhancement of immune function.
The ingestion of citrus fruit has been reported to be
beneficial for the reduction of certain types of human cancer.
Several classes of citrus phytochemicals, including monoterpenes, limonoids and flavonoids, have been recognized as
effective chemopreventive agents in rodent carcinogenesis
models. Auraptene (7-geranyloxycoumarin), a coumarin
derivative have been isolated, from citrus fruit (e.g. grapefruit) and have been demonstrated its anti-tumor promoting
effect in mouse skin and anti-carcinogenesis activities in rat
tongue, esophagus and colon [38]. Murakami A. et al. [38]
reported that Auraptene suppresses superoxide anion (O2
–
)
generation from inflammatory leukocytes in in vitro experiments. In the study, they investigated the anti-inflammatory
activities of Auraptene using a 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol13-acetate-treated mouse skin model, and compared them
with those of Umbelliferone (7-hydroxycoumarin), a
structural analog of Auraptene that is virtually inactive
toward O2
–
 generation inhibition. Double pre-treatments of
mouse skin with Auraptene, but not Umbelliferone,
markedly suppressed edema formation, hydrogen peroxide
production, leukocyte infiltration, and the rate of proliferating cell nuclear antigen-stained cells. These inhibitory effects
by Auraptene are attributable to its selective blockade of the
activation stage, as revealed by single pre-treatment
experiments. Umbelliferone did not show any inhibitory
effect. This contrasting activity profile between Auraptene
and Umbelliferone was rationalized to be a result of their
distinct differences in cellular uptake efficiencies, i.e. the
geranyloxyl group in Auraptene was found to play an
essential role in incorporation. Thus, the findings indicate
that Auraptene is an effective agent to attenuate the biochemical responsiveness of inflammatory leukocytes, which
may be essential for a greater understanding of the action
mechanism that underlies its inhibition of inflammationassociated carcinogenesis.
Coumarin, in combination with cimetidine, has been
subjected to separate clinical trials for the treatment of
advanced renal cell carcinoma, malignant melanoma, and
non-small cell lung cancer [39]. While objective tumor
regressions were observed only in renal carcinoma, no
symptomatic or organ dysfunction toxicity was observed in
any of the trials. The purpose of this in vitro study was to
determine the concentrations of coumarin and 7-
hydroxycoumarin that would be toxic to human peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PB-MNC) and human and murine
bone marrow (GM) progenitor stem cells. Coumarin was
nontoxic for PB-MNC in concentrations up to 100 mg/mL.
Concentrations of coumarin or 7-hydroxycoumarin greater
than or equal to 200 mg/mL produced significant suppression
of human marrow GM stem cell activity. Coumarin greater
than or equal to 25 mg/mL produced suppression of murine
marrow GM stem cell activity. Differences in human and
murine marrow sensitivity probably reflect interspecies
differences in metabolism of coumarin. Correlations between
toxic concentrations in vitro and maximally achievable
serum concentration in vivo in humans await the results of
further clinical trials. An immunostimulant therapy with
coumarin and cimetidine was evaluated in 17 patients with
advanced malignant melanoma [40, 41]. Induction therapy
with coumarin 100 mg daily was given for 8 weeks, after
which cimetidine 1000 mg daily was added. No patients had
been previously treated with cytotoxic drugs. All patients
had good performance status. Sixteen patients experienced
progressive disease, and only one patient showed no change
lasting for 30 weeks. It is concluded that treatment with this
schedule of coumarin and cimetidine is without effect in
advanced malignant melanoma.
Aflatoxin B1 is a potent hepatocarcinogen produced by
Aspergillus flavus, a mold that frequently contaminates rice
and cereal crops in humid areas of the world. In combination
with hepatitis B, Aflatoxin B1 is thought to be largely
responsible for the high incidence of hepatocellular
carcinoma in southeast China and southern Africa. Like most
chemical carcinogens, the mycotoxin requires bioactivation
to exert its carcinogenic effects. The ultimate carcinogen of
Aflatoxin B1 is the exo-8, 9-epoxide, and once generated by
the actions of CYP, it readily forms adducts with DNA. In
humans, hepatocellular carcinoma resulting from exposure to
Aflatoxin B1 is associated with mutations in codon 249 of
the p53 tumor suppressor gene, whereas in the rat it is
associated with mutations in codons 12 and 13 of ras
oncogenes. Although primates and rats are sensitive to
Aflatoxin B1, the mouse can tolerate high levels of the
mycotoxin without showing signs of acute liver damage or of
developing liver cancer. Because it is highly improbable that
Aflatoxin B1 -producing molds can be eradicated from the
environment, chemoprevention is an attractive strategy to
protect individuals from the risk of liver cancer caused by
exposure to the mycotoxin. Structurally diverse compounds
can confer resistance to aflatoxin B1 hepatocarcinogenesis in
the rat. Treatment with either phytochemical coumarin or
synthetic antioxidants and other drugs has been found to
increase hepatic aldo-keto reductase activity toward
Aflatoxin B1 -dialdehyde and glutathione S-transferase (GST)
activity toward Aflatoxin B1 -8, 9-epoxide in both male and
female rats [42]. Under the conditions used, the natural
benzopyrone coumarin was a major inducer of the Aflatoxin
B1 aldehyde reductase (AFAR) and the aflatoxin-conjugating
class- GST A5 subunit in rat liver, causing elevations of
between 25- and 35-fold in hepatic levels of these proteins.
Induction was not limited to AFAR and GSTA5: treatment
with coumarin caused similar increases in the amount of the
class- GST P1 subunit and NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase in rat liver. Immunohistochemistry demonstrated that the
overexpression of AFAR, GSTA5, GSTP1, and NAD
(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase affected by coumarin is
restricted to the centrilobular (periacinar) zone of the lobule,
sometimes extending almost as far as the portal tract. This
pattern of induction was also observed with ethoxyquin,
oltipraz, and trans-stilbene oxide. By contrast, induction of
these proteins by b-naphthoflavone and diethyl maleate was
predominantly periportal. Northern blotting showed that
36 Curr. Med. Chem. – Anti-Cancer Agents, 2005, Vol. 5, No. 1 Irena Kostova
induction of these phase II drug-metabolizing enzymes by
coumarin was accompanied by similar increases in the levels
of their mRNAs. To assess the biological significance of
enzyme induction by dietary coumarin, two intervention
studies were performed in which the ability of the benzopyrone to inhibit either Aflatoxin B1 -initiated preneoplastic
nodules (at 13 weeks) or Aflatoxin B1 -initiated liver tumors
(at 50 weeks) was investigated. Animals pretreated with
coumarin for 2 weeks prior to administration of Aflatoxin
B1, and with continued treatment during exposure to the
carcinogen for a further 11 weeks, were protected completely
from development of hepatic preneoplastic lesions by 13
weeks. In the longer-term dietary intervention, treatment
with coumarin before and during exposure to Aflatoxin B1
for a total of 24 weeks was found to significantly inhibit the
number and size of tumors that subsequently developed by
50 weeks. These data suggest that consumption of a
coumarin-containing diet provides substantial protection
against the initiation of Aflatoxin B1 hepatocarcinogenesis in
the rat. This report describes the identification of
phytochemicals that are effective inducers of Aflatoxin B1
detoxication enzymes. The study showed that coumarin is
highly effective at inducing not only AFAR and GSTA5, but
also certain other drug-metabolizing enzymes. On the basis
of this information, the hypothesis that enzyme induction by
coumarin would confer resistance to Aflatoxin B1
tumorigenesis was tested in the rat. The results from dietary
intervention showed that coumarin consumption does indeed
provide protection against initiation of Aflatoxin B1
hepatocarcinogenesis. The data presented in this report also
reveal the ability of different phytochemicals and synthetic
drugs to induce different enzymes in the liver in zone- and
sex-specific fashions.
The rat hepatic toxicity of coumarin and methyl
analogues (3-methylcoumarin (22), 4-methylcoumarin (23)
and 3, 4-dimethylcoumarin (24)) has been determined in vivo
and in vitro (freshly-isolated cells) [43]. Coumarin at a dose
of approximately 1 mmol/kg produced clear histological
evidence of centrilobular necrosis, while the methyl
analogues at an equivalent dose were much less toxic. By
use of a systematic random sampling protocol and quantitative morphometry it was determined that there was a lobar
variation in the extent of hepatic damage but that this
exhibited random inter-animal variation. The order of
cytotoxicity in vitro was identical to that observed in vivo. In
hepatocytes depleted of glutathione the toxicity of all four
compounds was increased. This was particularly marked for
the 3-methyl analogues, such that the order of toxicity was
different to that observed in vivo and in hepatocytes not
depleted of glutathione.
METAL COMPLEXES WITH COUMARINS
A new, mechanistically based, in vitro strategy involving
Balb/c 3T3 clone A 31-1-1 mouse embryo fibroblasts, has
been proposed for the determination of the carcinogenic
potential of inorganic chemicals, in order to establish priority
of metal compounds to be tested and, whenever possible, to
compare the in vitro results with the corresponding in vivo
data [44]. As a first step in this research, this study reports on
the cytotoxic effects of 58 metal compounds in the Balb/3T3
cell line. After harmonisation and standardisation of the
Balb/3T3 protocol, cells were exposed for 72 hours to a
fixed dose (100 mM) of 58 individual compounds. The
cytotoxicity induced by some metal compounds was found to
be related to their chemical form (for example, Cr(NO3)3 and
Na2CrO4), suggesting that the Balb/3T3 cell line is a
valuable cellular model in relation to this aspect of metal
speciation. The results of the systematic study on the metalinduced cytotoxic effects in the Balb/3T3 cell line could be
arbitrarily classified into three groups according to the
degree of cytotoxicity. Group I includes 26 species that
induced no observable effect or only a slight cytotoxic effect;
Group II includes 13 metal compounds that exhibited an
obvious degree of cytotoxicity; and Group III includes 19
metal species that displayed a strong cytotoxic response.
Metal compounds of Groups II and III are considered to be
of the highest priority for setting of dose-effect relationships
for a subsequent in vitro study on metal-induced concurrent
cytotoxicity and morphological transformation in the
Balb/3T3 cell line.
Nowadays, a lot of studies report complexes of coumarin
derivatives with metals, which possess biological activity.
Rare earth metals, especially lanthanium chloride manifest
an antitumor activity. Furthermore, literature data show that
the coumarins have also these properties. These previous
data from literature are in accordance with our investigations
[45-50]. They give our reason to suppose that complexes of
coumarins with lanthanides could present interesting
metalorganic compounds with antitumor activity. As a result
from our earlier work the cytotoxic profile of some
complexes of Mendiaxon (7-hydroxy-4-methylcoumarin)
(25), Warfarin (4-hydroxy-3-(3-oxo-1-phenylbutyl)-2H-1-
benzopyran-2-one), Coumachlor (4-hydroxy-3-[1-(4-chlorophenyl)-3-oxobutyl]-2H-1-benzopyran-2-one) (26) and
Niffcoumar (4-hydroxy-3-[1-(4-nitrophenyl)-3-oxobutyl]-
2H-1-benzopyran-2-one) (27) with lanthanides against
P3HR1, K-562 and THP-1 cell lines was proved [45-50].
The complexes of cerium, lanthanum and neodymium with
these coumarin ligands induced approximately 30 %
reduction of the survival P3HR1 Burkitt lymphoma cells at
concentration 100 and 400 mM. The cerium and lanthanum
complexes of Mendiaxon and Niffcoumar induce similar low
cytotoxic effect on AML derived THP-1 myeloleukemia
cells.
Zirconium complexes of Mendiaxon, Warfarin, Coumachlor, and Niffcoumar have been synthesized by us [45].
Cytotoxic screening by MTT-assay was carried out. Among
these compounds the zirconium complex of mendiaxon
showed highest cytotoxic activity against human promyelocytic leukemic HL-60 cells. The inorganic salt was found to
be active against this cell line.
Cerium complexes of Umbellipherone, Mendiaxon,
Warfarin, Coumachlor, and Niffcoumar have been
synthesized by us [46]. The molecules of the ligands were
optimized by means of the semiempirical quantum
mechanical method PM3 to the energetically most stable
conformers. All the ligands were characterized by molecular
and submolecular electronic indices and the putative donor
centers are proposed. Cytotoxic screening by MTT assay
was carried out. The cerium complexes were found to be
more active than the inorganic salts.
Synthetic and Natural Coumarins as Cytotoxic Agents Curr. Med. Chem. – Anti-Cancer Agents, 2005, Vol. 5, No. 1 37
Complexes of cerium(III), lanthanum(III) and neodymium(III) with 4-methyl-7-hydroxycoumarin (Mendiaxon,
Hymecromone) were synthesized by us [47]. The newly
synthesized compounds were assayed for acute intraperitoneal and per oral toxicity, influence on blood clotting
time and the most active complex was investigated for
spasmolytic activity. The complexes of cerium(III) and
neodymium(III) showed marginal cytotoxic activity against
transformed leukemic cell lines (P3HR1 and THP-1) as
compared to the inorganic salts.
With the relatively resistant CML derived erythroleukemic K-562 cell line we obtained very interesting in vitro
results [48-49]. It is noteworthy that the lanthanum and
neodymium complexes with Niffcoumar exert more
pronounced cytotoxic effects in comparison to cerium
complex. They have a strong cell proliferation inhibiting
effects (only about 30% of the cells were survival). This
means that the resistant tumor cells may be very good
inhibited with lanthanide complexes. This means also that
the spectrum of cytotoxicity of these complexes is different
from cis-DDP (II) and from Pt (II) complexes. These results
are of some interest as a possibility to influence of resistant
tumors. The corresponding lanthanide salts are found to be
of very low or missing activity. So far we can conclude that
the structure metal-ligand determines the antitumor spectrum
of the newly complexes. Those in vitro effects are not so
clearly expressed as it is in the case of cis-DDP (II).
Nevertheless their studying is interesting in connection with
other cell lines and tumors in order to find out the
differences in their spectrum of activity. Following the above
encouraging results we decided to continue our recent
investigations regarding antineoplastic/cytotoxic natural and
synthetic coumarin derivatives, and especially theire
cytotoxic lanthanide complexes.
NATURAL COUMARINS
Herbs have been used as food and for medicinal purposes
for centuries. Research interest has focused on various herbs
that possess hypolipidemic, antiplatelet, antitumor, or
immune-stimulating properties that may be useful adjuncts in
helping reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease and cancer.
In different herbs, a wide variety of active phytochemicals,
including coumarins, have been identified. Many of the herbs
contain potent antioxidant compounds that provide
significant protection against chronic diseases. Today we are
witnessing a great deal of public interest in the use of herbal
remedies. Herbal medicine is based on the premise that
plants contain natural substances that can promote health and
alleviate illness. In herbal medicine the term herbs is used
loosely to refer not only to herbaceous plants but also to
bark; roots; leaves; seeds; flowers and fruit of trees, shrubs,
and woody vines; and extracts of the same that are valued for
their savory, aromatic, or medicinal qualities. The botanical
term herb refers to seed-producing plants with nonwoody
stems that die down at the end of the growing season. Plants
have played a significant role in maintaining human health
and improving the quality of human life for thousands of
years, and have served humans well as valuable components
of seasonings, beverages, cosmetics, dyes, and medicines.
Thousands of coumarins have been identified in plants.
OH
COOH COOH
OH
COOH
OH
O
OH
O
CH
CH2 C CH3
O
O
RO
O O
OR
O
R1
O
ONa
O
CH
CH2 C CH3
O
COOH
OH
OH
O
OH
O
CH
CH2 C CH3
O
Cl
5 12
13 14
6
7
19 26
38 Curr. Med. Chem. – Anti-Cancer Agents, 2005, Vol. 5, No. 1 Irena Kostova
Coumarins have extensive biological properties that promote
human health and help reduce the risk of disease. Coumarins
act as antioxidants, inhibit platelet aggregation, and act as
antiinflammatory and antitumor agents.
Kofinas C, et al. [51] isolated seven coumarins from the
aerial parts of Tordylium apulum and established their
structures by spectroscopic means. All compounds were
tested in vitro for their cytotoxicity against two cell line
systems. The antiproliferative effects for three of them were
studied at the level of the cell cycle in asynchronous cells of
the NSCLC-N6 line with a flow cytometry apparatus.
Uchiyama T. et al. [52] isolated six coumarins from the roots
of Dorstenia brasiliensis. Their structures were elucidated on
the basis of their spectral data. They showed moderate
cytotoxicity against leukemia cells (L-1210 and HL-60).
Some coumarin-, flavonol- and flavanon-acetic acids were
described by Valenti P. et al. [53]. The cytotoxicity of the
synthesized compounds was determined on human colon
carcinoma cell line (LoVo) through evaluation of neutral red
uptake, performed by the Riddel method. All tested
derivatives were able to induce a statistically significant
reduction of lysosomal neutral red uptake at 5.10-5 M
concentration. Some compounds were more active than the
reference compound flavon-8-acetic acid. Nine known
compounds, seven kaurenic acid-type diterpenes, a coumarin
and a flavone, were isolated, from the aerial parts of Mikania
hirsutissima DC (Compositae) [54]. The structures of new
norhumulenes were determined by spectroscopic means. The
cytotoxic activities of isolated compounds against leukemia
cells (L 1210) were investigated. They showed relatively
strong cytotoxicity. New cytotoxic compounds, scopoletin
(28) and the novel coumarino-lignan cleomiscosin A
were isolated from the wood of Simaba multiflora
(Simaroubaceae) [55]. Two antileukemic daphnane esters,
Pimelea factor P2 and the new compound dircin, were
isolated from the twigs and flowers of Dirca occidentalis A.
Gray (Thymelaeaceae) [56]. Three lignans, (-)-medioresinol,
(+)-syringaresinol and (-)-lariciresinol, as well as the
coumarin daphnoretin, were found to be additional cytotoxic
constitents of this taxon. A limonoid, clausenolide-1-ethyl
ether and two coumarins, dentatin and nor-dentatin, were
isolated from Clausena excavata [57]. Limonoid was
obtained from the crude ethanol extract of the rhizomes and
the roots but had not previously been isolated from C.
excavata and exhibited HIV-1 inhibitory activity. Coumarins
dentatin and nor-dentatin, with their structures related to an
anti-HIV-1 substance, (+)-calanolide A (29), were obtained
from the crude chloroform extract of the rhizomes. Both
induced toxicity to cells used in a syncytium assay for antiHIV-1 activity. These compounds, did not show any
cytotoxic effect against KB and BC-1 cell lines (IC50 value >
20 mg/mL).
The purpose of the study [58] was to investigate the
potential neuroprotective effects of myricetin (flavonoid) and
fraxetin (coumarin) on rotenone-induced apoptosis in SHSY5Y cells, and the possible signal pathway involved in a
neuronal cell model of Parkinson's disease. These two
compounds were compared to N-acetylcysteine. The
viability of cells was assessed by 3-(4, 5-dimethylthiazol-2-
yl)-2, 5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT), and
cytotoxicity was assayed by lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)
released into the culture medium. Parameters related to
apoptosis, such as caspase-3 activity, the cleavage of
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase and the levels of reactive
oxygen species were also determined. Rotenone caused a
time- and dose-dependent decrease in cell viability and the
degree of LDH release was proportionally to the effects on
cell viability. Cells were pretreated with fraxetin, myricetin
and N-acetylcysteine at different concentrations for 30 min
before exposure to rotenone. Cytotoxicity of rotenone (5
mM) for 16 h was significantly diminished as well as the
release of LDH into the medium, by the effect of fraxetin,
myricetin and N-acetylcysteine, with fraxetin (100 mM) and
N-acetylcysteine (100 mM) being more effective than
myricetin (50 mM). Rotenone-induced apoptosis in SHSY5Y cells was detected by an increase in caspase-3 activity
and in the cleavage of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase. After
exposing these cells to rotenone, a significant increase in
reactive oxygen species preceded apoptotic events. Fraxetin
(100 mM) and N-acetylcysteine (100 mM) not only reduced
rotenone-induced reactive oxygen species formation, but also
attenuated caspase-3 activity and poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase cleavage at 16 h against rotenone-induced apoptosis.
The effect of fraxetin in both experiments was similar to that
of N-acetylcysteine. These results demonstrated the
protective action of fraxetin and suggest that it can reduce
apoptosis, possibly by decreasing free radical generation in
SH-SY5Y cells. Myricetin at 100 mM was without any
preventive effect.
The cytotoxicity and in-vitro antiviral activity of a series
of compounds in samples extracted from various parts of the
Indian holy tree, Bael (Aegle marmelos corr.) were evaluated
for their efficacy against human coxsackieviruses B1-B6
[59]. The inhibitory concentrations IC50 for leaves (L1 and
L2) stem and stem bark (S1, S2, S3 and S4), fruit (F1 and
F2micro), root and root bark (R1 and R2) and pure
compound, the marmelide were 1000 mg/mL (for L1 and
L2), 1000 mg/mL (for S1, S2, S3 and S4), 1000 mg/mL (for
F1) and 500 mg/mL (for F2) 250 mg/mL (for R1) and 500
mg/mL (for R2) and 62.5 mg/mL for marmelide respectively
by plaque inhibition assay at 96 hrs. On the other hand, the
corresponding value for Ribavirin, a standard antiviral drug,
was 2000 mg/mL for the same viruses at the same time
period. These concentrations did not exhibit any toxicity to
Vero cells, the host subtoxic concentrations were 5000
mg/mL for leaf and stem fractions 2000 mg/mL for fruit
fractions 500 and 1000 mg/mL for root fractions 250 mg/mL
for marmelide and 2000 mg/mL for Ribavirin. The cytotoxic
concentrations were 8000 mg/mL for leaf and stem
compounds 4000 mg/mL for fruit; 1000 mg/mL and 2000
mg/mL for root 500 mg/mL for marmelide and 4000 mg/mL
for ribavirin at 96 hrs. Additionally pretreatment of host
cells, virus inactivation, yield reduction and effect of time of
addition assays against coxsackievirus B3, suggested that
marmelide was most effective as a virucidal agent besides
interfering at early events of its replicative cycle like
adsorption, penetration, at various steps in single cycle
growth curve and effect of time of addition.
Geiparvarin (30), containing coumarin moiety, is an
antiproliferative compound isolated from the leaves of
Geijera parviflora, and may represent a new drug which
targets tubulin. To better explore the potential use of this
Synthetic and Natural Coumarins as Cytotoxic Agents Curr. Med. Chem. – Anti-Cancer Agents, 2005, Vol. 5, No. 1 39
agent, Miglietta A. et al. [60] investigated the antimicrotubular and cytotoxic effects of new synthetic aromatic
derivatives of geiparvarin. These drugs inhibited polymerization of microtubular protein, particularly when the
assembly was induced by paclitaxel. The microtubular
network organization of fibroblasts was altered more
effectively by some drugs. Normal microtubule architecture
completely disappeared when the cells were treated
simultaneously with drugs and paclitaxel: microtubules
depolymerized or were reorganized into bundles, in a similar
but more disarrayed fashion than that observed after
treatment with paclitaxel alone. Cytotoxicity studies showed
a dose-dependent effect, whereas combined administration of
drugs and paclitaxel increased cytotoxicity, more effectively
in paclitaxel versus derivatives administration alone. Some
simple geiparvarin analogues, in which the coumarin moiety
has been replaced with an X-substituted benzene ring, are
described [61]. The compounds were tested on LoVo cells
(human colon carcinoma cell line) and some of them show a
cytotoxicity comparable with that of the prototype. A QSAR
analysis was also attempted, but it did not provide
satisfactory results, mainly because of the limited range of
variation of the biological activity.
Bioassay-guided fractionation of a CH2Cl2-methanol
extract of the bark of Ochrocarpos punctatus resulted in the
isolation of seven new coumarins, ochrocarpins A-G, three
new benzophenone derivatives, ochrocarpinones A-C, and
five known coumarins, mammea A/AC cyclo F, mammea
A/AD cyclo D, mammea A/AB cyclo F, mammea A/AA
cyclo F, mammea A/AB cyclo D and 15, 16-dihydro-16-
hydroperoxyplukenetione [62]. The structures of the
compounds were established on the basis of extensive 1D
and 2D NMR spectroscopic data interpretation. All compounds exhibited cytotoxicity against the A2780 ovarian
cancer cell line. Two new naturally occurring coumarins,
isomesuol and mammearin A, together with nine known
Mammea coumarins were isolated from the ethilacetat
extract of the leaves and twigs of Mammea harmandii [63].
The coumarins showed cytotoxicity against a panel of
mammalian cancer cell lines. Their structures were determined by spectroscopic methods. The assignments of 13C
NMR signals of isomesuol, which was isolated for the first
time as a natural product, have been revised.
Five new coumaronochromones, euchretins J-N, along
with twelve known compounds, euchretins A, C, D, F, H, I,
(+)-matrine, (-)-cytisine, quercetin (31), trifolirhizin, retusin
8-methyl ether, and genistein, were isolated from the
methanolic extracts of Euchresta formosana [64]. The structures of the compounds were established by spectroscopic
analyses. The compounds were demonstrated to have cytotoxicity against 59T cell line. Bocca C. et al. [65] investigated biological activity of ferulenol, a prenylated 4-
hydroxycoumarin from Ferula communis. Ferulenol
stimulates tubulin polymerization in vitro, and inhibits the
binding of radiolabeled colchicine to tubulin. It rearranges
cellular microtubule network into short fibres, and alters
nuclear morphology. Remarkably, ferulenol exerts a dosedependent cytotoxic activity against various human tumor
cell lines. From the root bark of Millettia pervilleana, which
had shown significant cytotoxic activity, a 3-phenylcoumarin, named pervilleanine (32), two new pterocarpans,
pervilline and pervillinine, and one known, emoroidocarpan,
were isolated in addition to rotenone and 3alpha-hydroxyrotenone [66]. The anticancer activity of two previously
isolated isoflavanones, pervilleanone and 3'-O-demethylpervilleanone is reported. Chemical investigation of the
ethanol extract of Morus alba L. (Moraceae), as guided by
free radical scavenging activity, furnished 5, 7-dihydroxycoumarin 7-methyl ether, two prenylflavones, cudraflavone
B and cudraflavone C, and oxyresveratrol [67]. Compounds
5, 7-dihydroxycoumarin 7-methyl ether and oxyresveratrol
showed superoxide scavenging effects with the IC50 values
of 19.1 +/- 3.6 and 3.81 +/- 0.5 mM, respectively. Compound
oxyresveratrol exhibited a DPPH free radical scavenging
effect (IC(50) = 23.4 +/- 1.5 mM). Compounds cudraflavone
B and oxyresveratrol showed hepatoprotective effects with
EC50 values of 10.3 +/- 0.42 and 32.3 +/- 2.62 mM,
respectively, on tacrine-induced cytotoxicity in human liverderived Hep G2 cells.
Three new coumarin derivatives, compounds, three new
furanocoumarins and a novel dioxocane derivative were
isolated from the fern Cyclosorus interruptus (Willd.) H. Ito
[68]. Based on spectrometric and spectroscopic analysis
(FAB or El mass spectrometry as well as 1D and 2D
NMR experiments) their structures were characterised as
5,7-dihydroxy-6-methyl-4-phenyl- 8-(3-phenylpropionyl)-1
-benzopyran-2-one (33), 5, 7-dihydroxy-6-methyl-4-phenyl8-(3-phenyl-trans-acryloyl)-1-benzopyran-2-one (34), 5,7-
dihydroxy-8-(2-hydroxy-3-phenylpropionyl) - 6-methyl-4-
phenyl-1-benzopyran-2-one (35), 8-benzyl-5, 8-dihydroxy6-methyl-4-phenylfuro[2,3-h]-1-benzopyran-2,9 - dione, 8-
benzyl-5,8 beta, 9 beta-trihydroxy-6-methyl-4-phenyl-8,9-
dihydro-furo[2, 3-h]-1-benzopyran-2-one, 8-benzyl-5, 8 beta,
9 alpha-trihydroxy-6-methyl-4-phenyl-8,9-dihydro-furo[2, 3-
h]-1-benzopyran-2-one and 5,11-dihydroxy-6-methyl-4-
phenyl-11-(1-phenylmethyl)-7,10-dioxocane[5,6-h]-1-benzopyran-2, 12-dione. For these compounds the authors propose
the trivial names interruptins A-F. Compounds 5,7-
dihydroxy-6-methyl-4-phenyl-8-(3- phenylpropionyl) -1 -
benzopyran-2-one and 5, 7-dihydroxy-6-methyl-4-phenyl8-(3-phenyl-trans-acryloyl)-1-benzopyran-2-one, were cytotoxic to a KB cell line.
The CH2Cl2 extract of the stem bark of Kielmeyera
albopunctata was subjected to a bioassay-linked LC-MS
dereplication procedure using the KB cell line to afford the
new coumarins 4-(1-methylpropyl)-5, 7-dihydroxy-8-(4-
hydroxy-3-methylbutyryl)-6-(3-methylbut-2-enyl)chromen-2-
one, 9-(1-methylpropyl)-4-hydroxy-5-(4-hydroxy-3-methylbutyryl)-2-(1-hydroxy-1-methylethyl)-2,3-dihydrofuro-[2, 3-
f]chromen-7-one and 5,7-dihydroxy-8-(4-hydroxy-3-methylbutyryl)-6-(3-methylbut-2-enyl)-4- phenylchromen -2-one
[69]. Coumarins 4-(1-methylpropyl)-5, 7-dihydroxy-8-(4-
hydroxy-3-methylbutyryl)-6-(3-methylbut-2-enyl)chromen -
2-one and 5, 7-dihydroxy-8-(4-hydroxy-3-methylbutyryl)-6-
(3-methylbut-2-enyl)-4-phenylchromen-2-one showed moderate cytotoxicity, while 9-(1-methylpropyl)-4-hydroxy-5-(4-
hydroxy-3-methylbutyryl)-2-(1 -hydroxy -1 -methylethyl)- 2,
3-dihydrofuro[2, 3-f]chromen-7-one was inactive at 20 mg/
mL.
The ether soluble fraction of the roots of Ononis
vaginalis Vahl. Symb. afforded three new compounds: 3-
40 Curr. Med. Chem. – Anti-Cancer Agents, 2005, Vol. 5, No. 1 Irena Kostova
hydroxy-4, 9-dimethoxycoumestan, maginaldehyde [2-(4-
hydroxy-2-methoxyphenyl)-5, 6-dimethoxy-3-benzofurancarboxaldehyde] and 5, 7, 4'-trihydroxy-4-styrylcoumarin
[70]. The styrylcoumarin derivative showed significant
antiviral activity against Herpes simplex type 1 and weak
cytotoxicity. A new coumarin, 5-(4-hydroxyphenethenyl)-4,
7-dimethoxycoumarin (36) was isolated from the combined
ethylacetate extracts of the root bark, root wood and stem
bark of Monotes engleri, and found to be cytotoxic against
two cell lines in a human tumor panel [71]. Its structure was
determined on the basis of spectroscopic methods. Three
coumarins and three known mansonones were isolated from
the heartwood of Mansonia gagei Drumm [72]. The
structures of the three coumarins were elucidated as 3, 8-
dimethyl-5-isopropyl-6-methoxycoumarin (mansonrin A)
(37), 3, 8-dimethyl-5-isopropyl-6-hydroxycoumarin (mansorin B) (38) and 2, 3-dihydro-3, 6, 9-trimethyl naphtho[1, 8-
bc]pyran-7-oxa-8-one (mansorin C) by analyses of physical
properties and spectroscopic data. The cytotoxicity of the
isolated compounds against brine shrimp Artemia salina
Linn. was also evaluated. Salloum R.M. et al. [73] examined
the effects of a new antiangiogenic isocoumarin, as a
radiation modifier in vitro and in vivo. The studies demonstrate that this isocoumarin is cytotoxic to human umbilical
vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) but not to Lewis lung
carcinoma (LLC) cells nor Seg-1, esophageal adenocarcinoma cells, in clonogenic survival assays.
N-Tosyl-l-phenylalanyl chloromethyl ketone, an inhibitor
of chymotrypsin-like serine protease (CSP), prevents DNA
fragmentation and apoptotic cell death in certain blood cell
lines and was reported to reduce hippocampal neuronal
damage caused by cerebral ischemia. Movsesyan V.A. et al.
[74] examined the role of CSP on recovery after lateral fluid
percussion-induced traumatic brain injury (TBI) in rats, as
well as on cell survival in various in vitro models of
neuronal cell death. TBI caused significant time-dependent
upregulation of CSP activity, but not trypsin-like serine
protease activity in injured cortex. Intracerebroventricular
administration of N-tosyl-l-phenylalanyl chloromethyl
ketone to rats after TBI did not significantly affect deficits of
spatial learning but exacerbated motor dysfunction after
injury. Moreover, N-tosyl-l-phenylalanyl chloromethyl
ketone did not prevent apoptotic neuronal cell death caused
by serum/K(+) deprivation or by application of staurosporine
or etoposide in cultured rat cerebellar granule cells, rat
cortical neurons, or in the human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y
cell line. Instead, at doses from 10 to 100 mM, N-tosyl-lphenylalanyl chloromethyl ketone was cytotoxic in all
cultures tested. Similar results were obtained in cultures
treated with another CSP inhibitor, 3, 4-dichloroisocoumarin
(39). Cell death caused by CSP inhibitors was neither
caspase-dependent nor associated with oligonucleosomal
DNA fragmentation. Taken together, these data do not
support a neuroprotective role for CSP inhibitors. Rather,
they suggest that CSPs may serve an endogenous neuroprotective role, possibly by modulating necrotic cell death.
NATURAL ISOCOUMARINS
Devienne K.F. et al. [75] investigated structural parameters that could affect the cytotoxicity of isocoumarins
similar to 9, 10-dihydroxy-5, 7-dimethoxy-1H-naphtho(2,
3c)pyran-1-one (paepalantine) (40). Paepalantine has antimicrobial activity, as well as significant in vitro cytotoxic
effects in the McCoy cell line. Two other natural and two
semi-synthetic isocoumarins with similar structures obtained
from the capitula of Paepalanthus bromelioides were tested
on the same cell line by the neutral red assay. Substitution of
the 9 and/or 10-hydroxy group made these compounds less
cytotoxic. A new isocoumarin with antimicrobial activity
was isolated from Paepalanthus vellozioides (a native
Brazilian plant) and called paepalantine [76]. This study was
carried out to assess the mutagenic activity of this new agent
in assays with Salmonella typhimurium TA100, TA98, and
TA102 and in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cell cultures, as
well as cytotoxicity to McCoy cells. Paepalantine caused a
significant dose-dependent increase in the frequency of
revertants in the three strains used in the assay, both with and
without S9 mix, in concentrations varying from 2 to 128
mg/plate. The mutagenicity was confirmed in assays with
CHO cells treated in the G1, S, and G2 phases of the cell
cycle. There was an increase in the chromosomal aberration
frequency, mainly in the G2 phase. Furthermore, the mitotic
index of the treated cultures (40, 80, and 160 mg/mL) was
significantly lower, indicating cytotoxicity. The midpoint
cytotoxicity values of McCoy cells by the neutral red (NR)
and microculture tetrazolium (MTT) techniques resulted in a
NR50 and MTT50 of 30 and 38 micrograms mg/mL,
respectively. Alterations to the paepalantine structure are
suggested to reduce its mutagenic and cytotoxic activity in
investigations for its antineoplastic potential. Dioscorone A
and a new isocoumarin derivative were isolated from the
rhizome of Dioscorea futschauensis R. Kunth [77]. The
structures of the compounds were elucidated on the basis of
detailed analysis of NMR spectra. Their anti-fungal activity
against Pyricularia oryzae and cytotoxic activity on K562
and HCT-15 cell lines were evaluated in vitro.
NATURAL PYRANOCOUMARINS
A new (+)-norepinephrine derivative, syncarpamide,
along with a known coumarin, (+)-S-marmesin (41), and one
known alkaloid, decarine, have been isolated from the stem
of Zanthoxylum syncarpum [78]. The structure of syncarpamide was elucidated on the basis of 1D and 2D NMR, MS,
IR, optical rotation, and CD analyses. Its absolute stereochemistry was elucidated by synthesis of its enantiomer and
subsequent comparison of CD data. Characterizations of
compounds (+)-S-marmesin and decarine were based on
spectral analysis and comparison with reported data.
Compounds syncarpamide and decarine showed antiplasmodial activity, with IC50 values of 2.04 and 1.44 mM
against Plasmodium falciparum D(6) clone and 3.06 and
0.88 mM against P. falciparum W(2) clone, respectively.
Decarine showed cytotoxicity at 56.42 mM, whereas
syncarpamide was not cytotoxic at 10.42 mM. Syncarpamide
was tested for hypotensive activity, but no activity was
observed. 3, 5-Dimethoxy-4-geranyloxycinnamyl alcohol, 8-
methoxy-N-methylflindersine, xanthyletin (42) and sesamin
have been isolated from petroleum ether extract of the stem
bark of Zanthoxylum rhesta [79]. The petroleum ether
extract and 8-methoxy-N-methylflindersine showed cytotoxicity on brine shrimp nauplii. Four pyranocoumarins:
dipetaline, alloxanthoxyletin (43), xanthoxyletin (44) and
Synthetic and Natural Coumarins as Cytotoxic Agents Curr. Med. Chem. – Anti-Cancer Agents, 2005, Vol. 5, No. 1 41
xanthyletin; and two lignans: sesamin and asarinin were
isolated from the Northern prickly ash, Zanthoxylum americanum [80]. To varying degrees, all inhibited the incorporation of tritiated thymidine into human leukaemia (HL-60)
cells. Dipetaline was the most active with an IC50 of 0.68
ppm, followed by alloxanthoxyletin (1.31 ppm), sesamin
(2.71 ppm), asarinin (4.12 ppm), xanthoxyletin (3.48 ppm)
and xanthylletin (3.84 ppm).
Cnidium monnieri is a plant, which grows in China
whose seeds are used in classical traditional Chinese
medicine for skin problems and as a natural sex booster.
Cnidium is known in China as She Chuang Zi. Cnidium seed
contains several compounds including coumarins.
Preliminary studies show some of the compounds in cnidium
may have anti-histamine, anti-itch, anti-fungal, and antibacterial effects, along with having an influence on the
pituitary-adrenocortex axis. Additional studies on rodents
indicate that cnidium may improve bone strength (coumarins
from fruits of cnidium inhibit formation and differentiation
of multinucleated osteoclasts of rats). Cnidium may also
have anti-cancer properties. Cnidii monnieri Fructus
[Cnidium monnieri (L.) Cusson] is used as a tonic agent in
traditional Chinese medicine [81]. In a Chinese herbcytotoxicity screening test, the ethanol extract of Cnidii
monnieri Fructus exhibited strong effects on human
leukemia (HL-60), cervical carcinoma (HeLa) and colorectal
carcinoma (CoLo 205) cells. Then, the Cnidii monnieri
Fructus extract was subjected to silica gel column
chromatography and recrystallization to give five coumarins:
osthol (45), imperatorin (46), bergapten (47), isopimpinellin
(48), and xanthotoxin (49). Among these compounds, osthol
showed the strongest cytotoxic activity on tumor cell lines.
The structure-activity relationship established from the
results indicated that the prenyl group has an important role
in the cytotoxic effects. However, imperatorin showed the
highest sensitivity to HL-60 cells and the least cytotoxicity
to normal PBMCs. Osthol and imperatorin both caused
apoptotic bodies, DNA fragmentation, and enhanced PARP
degradation in HL-60 cells by biochemical analysis. These
results indicate that osthol and imperatorin can induce
apoptosis in HL-60 cells. Therefore, osthol and imperatorin
are cytotoxic marker substances in the fruits of Cnidium
monnieri.
Four flavonoid glycosides, flavaprin, evodioside B,
vitexin, and hesperidin, as well as the coumarins bergapten,
xanthotoxin, and isopimpinellin, the lignan simplexoside, the
steroids beta-sitosterol and daucosterol, the limonoids
isolimonexic acid and limonin, and uracil and myo-inositol
have been isolated from Euodia daniellii [82]. The structures
of these compounds were established from spectral data.
Among the isolates, bergapten showed cyclooxygenase-2
inhibitory activity with an IC50 value of 6.2 mg/mL.
Flavonoids isolated from this plant exhibited no cytotoxic
activity against the human tumor cell lines, A549, SKOV-3,
SKMEL-2, XF498, and HCT15.
Four known coumarins, dentatin, nor-dentatin, clausenidin and xanthoxyletin, and six known carbazole derivatives,
O
OH
O
CH
CH2 C CH3
O
NO2
O
O
O O
O
O O O
Me
O Me
Me
O
HO O
OH O
OH
OH
OH
O
Cl
Cl
O
OH OH
OMe
MeO
O
Me
O
O
OH
O O
O O O
MeO O O
O
27
29 Calanolide A
30
31 39 40
41
5
8
42 Xanthyetin
44 5- Methoxy-xanthyletin (xanthoxyletin)
43
42 Curr. Med. Chem. – Anti-Cancer Agents, 2005, Vol. 5, No. 1 Irena Kostova
3-formylcarbazole, mukonal, 3-methoxycarbonylcarbazole,
murrayanine, 2-hydroxy-3-formyl-7-methoxycarbazole and
clauszoline J were isolated from Clausena excavata [83].
Compounds dentatin and 3-formylcarbazole were first
isolated from the crude chloroform extract of the rhizomes.
All compounds demonstrated no cytotoxicity against KB and
BC-1 cell lines. Five coumarins (seselin (50), 5-methoxyseselin (51), suberosin (52), xanthyletin and xanthoxyletin)
were isolated from the roots of Plumbago zeylanica [84]. All
coumarins were not previously found in this plant.
Cytotoxicity of these compounds to various tumor cells lines
was evaluated, and they were significantly suppressed
growth of Raji, Calu-1, HeLa, and Wish tumor cell lines.
The synthesis of known and new coumarins in the seselin
and xanthyletin series is described [85]. The cytotoxic
activity of the compounds was carried out in vitro on L-1210
cells. The most active compounds in the seselin series and in
the xanthyletin series were determined. Structure-activity
relationships are discussed. Gunatilaka, A.A. et al. [86]
isolated twelve coumarins from plants of the Rutaceae
collected in Sri Lanka. Coumarins have been subjected to a
mechanism-based anticancer bioassay employing DNA
repair-deficient and repair-proficient yeasts. Of these, seselin
and xanthyletin were found to be active. Seselin also
exhibited moderate cytotoxicity. Four coumarin derivatives,
theraphins A, B, C, and D, along with three known
xanthones, 2-hydroxyxanthone, 1, 7-dihydroxyxanthone, and
5-hydroxy-1-methoxyxanthone, were isolated from the bark
of Kayea assamica (Clusiaceae) native to Myanmar [87].
Their structures were determined using spectroscopic and
chemical techniques. The absolute configuration of
theraphins A was established by the modified Mosher ester
method. Theraphins A, B, and C exhibited good cytotoxicity
against Col2, KB, and LNCaP human cancer cell lines.
Theraphin D showed mild activity only against the KB cell
line.
NATURAL FUROCOUMARINS
Bark samples from several individuals of the understory
tree, Stauranthus perforatus (Rutaceae), were collected from
lower montane moist forest at c.a 1350 m a.s.l. at
Monteverde, Costa Rica [88]. The cytotoxic compounds
proved to be the quinoline alkaloids skimmianine and
veprisine, and the furocoumarin heraclenin (53). Fractionation of the methanol extract of Angelica dahurica Benth et
Hook resulted in the isolation of six furocoumarins,
imperatorin, isoimperatorin (54), (+/-)-byakangelicol, (+)-
oxypeucedanin (55), (+)-byakangelicin and (+)-aviprin [89].
Among these, compounds imperatorin and (+)-byakangelicin
exhibited strong hepatoprotective activities, displaying EC50
values of 36.6 +/- 0.98 and 47.9 +/- 4.6 mM, respectively.
Compounds (+/-)-byakangelicol and (+)-oxypeucedanin
showed moderate activities with EC50 values of 112.7 +/-
5.35 and 286.7 +/- 6.36 mM, respectively. Silybin as a
positive control showed the EC50 value with 69.0 +/- 3.4 mM.
Comparison of hepatoprotective activities for six
furocoumarins suggested that oxy-substitution at the C-9
position increased the hepatoprotective activity.
Angelicin (56), a naturally occurring furanocoumarin,
that showed antifungal activity, was considered as a lead
structure for a group of synthetic coumarins [90]. Antifungal
activities of the synthesized coumarins and angelicin
derivatives were reported against Candida albicans,
Cryptococcus neoformans, Saccharomyces cerevisiae and
Aspergillus niger. Human cell line cytotoxicity of several
coumarins was evaluated against KB cells. Angelicin and
several potent antifungals showed to be non-toxic in this
assay. The methanolic extract from the roots of Angelica
furcijuga Kitagawa was found to exhibit protective effects on
liver injury induced by D-galactosamine (D-GalN) and
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) [91]. From the methanolic extract,
seventeen coumarins, two phenylpropanoids, and two
polyacetylenes were isolated and examined their in vitro and
in vivo hepatoprotective effects and inhibitory activity of NO
production in macrophages. A acylated khellactone,
isoepoxypteryxin, showed protective activity against DGalN-induced cytotoxicity in primary cultured rat hepatocytes. On the other hand, six acylated khellactones
(hyuganins A, B, C, and D, anomalin, isopteryxin) and two
polyacetylenes [(-)-falcarinol and falcarindiol] strongly
inhibited NO production induced by LPS in cultured mouse
peritoneal macrophages, and also other acylated khellactones
(isoepoxypteryxin, pteryxin, and suksdorfin (57)) and a
coumarin glycosides (praeroside II) were found to show the
activity. By comparison of the inhibitory activities for
acylated khellactones with those for other coumarins, acyl
groups were found to be essential to exerting potent activity.
Aqueous extracts of Angelica sinensis root, a herb
commonly used in the treatment of vitiligo in Traditional
Chinese Medicine, were tested for their activity on mouse
melanocyte proliferation in culture [92]. At concentrations of
0.5-2500 _g/mL, these extracts were not able to stimulate
melanocyte cell division. On the contrary, they exerted a
general cytotoxicity to the cells at higher concentrations.
Cytotoxicity was reduced by prior treatment of the extract
with polyvinylpolypyrrolidone, which was shown by thin
layer chromatography to reduce the coumarin content.
A coumestan derivative, psoralidin (58) was found to be
a cytotoxic principle of the seeds of Psoralea corylifolia L.
(Leguminosae) with the IC50 values of 0.3 and 0.4 mg/mL
against the HT-29 (colon) and MCF-7 (breast) human cancer
cell lines, respectively [93]. A coumarin, angelicin was also
isolated as a marginally cytotoxic agent along with an
inactive compound, psoralen from the plant. The isolates
were not active against the A541 (lung) and HepG2 (liver
hepatoma) cancer cell lines. The IC50 values of psoralidin
against SNU-1 and SNU-16 carcinoma cell lines were 53
and 203 mg/mL, respectively, indicating cytotoxic activity
against stomach carcinoma cell lines [94]. Bioassay-guided
fractionation of the H2O extract of the seeds of Psoralea
corylifolia furnished one hepatoprotective compound,
bakuchiol, together with two moderately active compounds,
bakuchicin and psoralen, on tacrine-induced cytotoxicity in
human liver-derived Hep G2 cells [95]. The EC50 values of
the compounds are 1.0, 47.0, 50.0 mg/mL, respectively.
Silymarin as a positive control showed the EC50 value with
5.0 mg/mL.
The synthesis of new tetrahydrobenzo- and benzopsoralen derivatives carrying at position 5 or 8 of the furocoumarin moiety a methoxy, hydroxy, or dimethylaminopropoxy side chain was reported [96]. The study of
their photoantiproliferative activity and ability to induce
Synthetic and Natural Coumarins as Cytotoxic Agents Curr. Med. Chem. – Anti-Cancer Agents, 2005, Vol. 5, No. 1 43
erythema on guinea pig skin allows to state that the
derivatives carrying the dimethylaminopropoxy side chain
exhibit a very interesting photobiological pattern. Indeed, if
compared with the lead compounds 5-MOP and 8-MOP,
they exert a higher cytotoxic activity devoid of significant
skin phototoxicity. Between them, the more interesting
appears to be a nonphototoxic compound whose antiproliferative activity on HeLa cells is 2 orders of magnitude
higher than that of the reference drug 8-MOP. Photoreaction
experiments have revealed that, like classic furocoumarins,
AT is the preferred nucleic base pair in its photobinding.
Moreover, the extent of covalent photoaddition to DNA
correlates well with the photobiological activity. Evaluation
of the ability to induce DNA cleavage in the presence of
human topoisomerase II has suggested that this enzyme is
probably the target accountable for this effect. The synthesis,
DNA binding and in vitro photoinduced cytotoxic properties
of a number of minor groove and sequence-directed psoralen
and coumarin conjugates of pyrrole- and imidazolecontaining distamycin analogues are described [97]. Results
from an ethidium displacement assay on calf thymus and T4
DNA suggest that like distamycin these agents bind strongly
to the minor groove of DNA. The data show that these
conjugates exhibit a lower AT preference than distamycin
and the decrease is significantly greater for the imidazolecontaining compounds. All of the compounds along with 8-
methoxypsoralen, were relatively noncytotoxic in the dark
with only the imidazole-psoralen compound giving an IC50
value below 100 mM. Following UV activation, all
compounds showed an increased potency with photoinduced
dose modifications in the human chronic myeloid leukemia
K562 cells under the UV irradiation conditions employed.
The psoralen-pyrrole analogue was over 300 times more
active following UV activation than agent 8-methoxypsoralen, 250 times more potent than the corresponding
coumarin conjugate, and 15-fold more potent than its
imidazole analogue. Data from CD dilution (with DMF)
studies show that upon irradiation with light at 366 nm, the
O O
O
Me
O
O O
O
Me
O O O
R
O O O
CH3
H3C
CH3
O O O
O
O
H
CH3
CH3 O O O
O
CH3
CH3
O O O
R2
R1
O O O
O O O
O
O Me
O
O
HO O O
O
OH
47
49 50 Seselin R=H
51 5-methoxyseselin R=OMe
52
53 54
55 Oxypeucedanin
R1=OCH2CH(O)C(CH3)2 (epoxide); R2=H 56
57
58
MeO O O
O O
R1
R2
O
46 Imperatorin R O 2=H; R1
45
48 Isopimpinellin R1=OMe; R2=OMe
44 Curr. Med. Chem. – Anti-Cancer Agents, 2005, Vol. 5, No. 1 Irena Kostova
compounds bind irreversibly to DNA. As expected coumarin
conjugates did not produce any cross-linked DNA under any
conditions. Since the psoralen conjugates are more phototoxic than their coumarin analogues, these results suggest
that DNA interstrand cross-link formation may be an
important mechanism by which they exert their biological
activity in cells.
Guilet D. et al. [98] isolated six coumarins from the fruits
and the stem bark of Calophyllum dispar (Clusiaceae). The
structures of these minor components were established by
means of spectroscopic analysis, including extensive 2D
NMR studies. Some of these coumarins exhibited a significant cytotoxic activity against KB cells. Eight new 4-
phenylfuranocoumarins have been isolated from the stem
bark and the fruits of Calophyllum dispar, together with
three known coumarins [99]. The structures of the
compounds were established by means of spectroscopic
analysis, including extensive 2D NMR studies. Some of
these furanocoumarins exhibited significant cytotoxic
activity against KB cells. The studies on the stem bark of
Calophyllum mucigerum (Guttiferae) have yielded a new
coumarin mucigerin, a prenylated xanthone cudraxanthone C
and the common steroidal triterpenes friedelin and stigmasterol [100]. Structural elucidations of these compounds
were achieved using 1H NMR, 13C NMR, DEPT, COSY,
HETCOR and HMBC experiments while MS gave the
molecular masses. Cytotoxic assays using CEM-SS cell line
(T-lymphoblastic leukemia) on the crude extracts of the stem
bark indicated some activity. The crude extracts were also
found to be moderately toxic against the larvae of Aedes
aegypti. In a search for anti-tumor-promoting agents,
Itoigawa M. et al. [101] carried out a primary screening of
ten 4-phenylcoumarins isolated from Calophyllum inophyllum L. (Guttiferae), by examining their possible inhibitory
effects on Epstein-Barr virus early antigen (EBV-EA)
activation induced by 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate
in Raji cells. All of the compounds tested in this study
showed inhibitory activity against EBV, without showing
any cytotoxicity. Calocoumarin-A showed more potent
activity than the other compounds tested. Furthermore,
calocoumarin-A exhibited a marked inhibitory effect on
mouse skin tumor promotion in an in vivo two-stage
carcinogenesis test. The results of the investigation indicate
that some of these 4-phenylcoumarins might be valuable as
potential cancer chemopreventive agents (anti-tumorpromoters).
Plants have formed the basis for the treatment of diseases
in traditional medicine systems for thousands of years, and
continue to play a major role in the primary health care of
about 80% of the world's inhabitants. The ability of chemical
agents to prevent the development of cancer has provoked
much interest as a means of reducing the incidence of
neoplastic disease in human populations. In the area of
cancer treatment, many claims have been made for the
beneficial effects of plants, though many of these claims may
be viewed with some skepticism since cancer, as a specific
disease entity, is likely to be poorly defined in terms of
folklore and traditional medicine. Nevertheless, the
discovery and development of efficacious anticancer agents,
provided convincing evidence that plants could be a source
of novel cancer chemotherapeutic agents. While the natural
product isolated as the active compound might not be
suitable for development as an effective drug, it can provide
a suitable lead for conversion into a clinically useful agent.
CONCLUSION
Coumarins comprise a vast array of biologically active
compounds ubiquitous in plants, many of which have been
used in traditional medicine for thousands of years. The
coumarins constitute an important class of compounds, with
several types of pharmacological agents possessing anticancer, anti-HIV, anticoagulant, spasmolytic and antibacterial activity among others. Of the many actions of
coumarins, antioxidant and antiproliferative effects stand
out. A large number of structurally novel coumarin derivatives have ultimately been reported to show substantial
cytotoxic activity in vitro and in vivo. Moreover, the
inhibitory action on inflammatory cells appears to surpass
any other clinically available compounds. Given that certain
substituents are known to be required or increase their
actions, the therapeutic potential of select coumarins is fairly
obvious.